---
title: 'Problem-Based Learning as a Model for Teaching Visual and Archival Literacy:
  The Archival Turn''s Pedagogical Turn''s Critical Turn (TURN) - Media Suite Teaching
  Fellowship CLARIAH-PLUS (2019-2023)'
date: 2022-09-16 16:02:00 +02:00
---

**Problem-Based Learning as a Model for Teaching Visual and Archival Literacy: The Archival Turn's Pedagogical Turn's Critical Turn (TURN)**

**Principle Investigator:** Dr. Sanne Koevoets, Lecturer (EUC)

**Project Period:** June 1, 2021 to April 3, 2022

The CLARIAH Media Suite offers students the challenge to investigate the visual cultural archive for themselves. Rather than applying a set of prescribed analytical tools to a prescribed corpus of visual materials that the lecturer has decided are relevant and representative of visual culture, students are given the task of curating, annotating, and studying an original corpus of visual media materials that they deem valuable. Through formulating a set of realistic learning problems that explicitly lead the way into the CLARIAH Media Suite, but otherwise are open-ended, the project sets upon a path towards a critical pedagogy in/of the archive. It does so by inviting a diversity of responses to material from Dutch media archives, and inviting a diversity of perspectives on these materials that originate with the students’ previous knowledge, life experiences, and sense of urgency. This project aims to explore and report on the pedagogical and political potential of collaboratively building annotated corpuses related to self-identified issues in visual culture as a starting point for building skills associated with visual literacy, archival literacy and critical cultural citizenship.

When teaching a module on the interpretation and critical analysis of visual culture at Erasmus University College entitled Images and Power, in-class discussions touched upon the embeddedness of racial and gender stereotypes in the cultural archive. Students became eager to find out for themselves where and how power manifests in visual culture, and where and how it can be resisted in their own work and lives. But I soon realized that the problems that I had developed for the problem-based learning module too heavily relied on an already overanalyzed and overfamiliar body of materials, for instance canonical examples, or examples that have appeared in widely used textbooks. In order to stimulate students to assume the role of curators, producers and disseminators of knowledge in their own right, this project is aimed at developing a set of learning triggers or prompts along the pedagogical principles of problem-based learning, using the collections and tools made accessible through the CLARIAH Media Suite. Embedded in the critical pedagogical project of enabling students to envision themselves as agents of change, the problem-based learning (hereafter PBL) archival encounters will be designed to activate skills in critical visual analysis and development of archival literacy through self-directed learning projects. 

PBL has been a cornerstone of education at Erasmus University College, where an international body of students from all over the world attend its TOP-rated Liberal Arts honors program to be trained to contribute to the solution of major global problems as critical world citizens. Their high level of motivation and familiarity with the principles of self-directed PBL makes them the ideal test group for exploring the possibilities of using the principles of PBL to develop a critical pedagogy in/of media archives. However, the project aims to formulate templates, best practices, and training materials that enable the development of learning problems aimed at training critical archival literacy at different educational levels and in different settings. In other words: if PBL proves to be as valuable to teaching archival skills as I expect it to be, the outcomes of this project are scalable and can be adapted to different settings.
\
As a student-centered pedagogical approach, PBL departs from real-world problems that enable self-directed learning in small group settings. The role of the tutor is that of a process guide rather than a point of knowledge transfer (Barrows & Tamblyn: 1980). Historically, PBL was developed in the context of medical training and education in technical and vocational fields, such as engineering and architecture. Developed in a “somewhat fractitious manner” (Servant-Miklos et. al. 2020, 19), PBL is and always has been “an approach to learning that is characterized by flexibility and diversity in the sense that it can be implemented in a variety of ways in and across different subjects and disciplines in diverse contexts” (Savin-Baden, 2000:3). PBL is by definition interdisciplinary as the problems it poses, like those in real life, can always be approached from a multitude of ways. While the tutor may at times point the way to a set of methodological and analytical tools, it is ultimately the students themselves who collectively decide which of these tools they deem to be of value for understanding the problem they have been posed.
 

The value of such approaches to humanities education arises out of the increased interpretative freedom when “decisions about what to include and how the findings will be presented are made by the students themselves – thus choice and creativity are within their ownership” (Hutchings & O’Rourke, 2002: 78). As a pedagogical model that upends the traditional hierarchy of the classroom by putting the direction of and the responsibility for the learning process in the hands of the students, PBL is highly compatible with (although not identical to) Freire’s critical (and radical) Pedagogy of the Oppressed, which envisions education as a “practice of freedom” (Cavanagh: 2019, 38-39). In the context of the current and urgent struggle over the meaning of images and the power of the cultural archive, and the exploration and exploitation of the power of images in the BLM movement and the most recent feminist wave, the development of critical pedagogies in and of the archive is both timely and necessary.
\
Much like the way in which PBL upends the traditional teacher-student hierarchy, this project proposes a method of teaching with archives that makes visible and investigates ways of harnessing as well as resisting the power of archives. As such, it falls within the scope of what Wendy Hayden calls “The Archival Turn’s Pedagogical Turn” (2017). Teaching information and archival literacy by engaging undergraduate students in the exploration of primary sources has been shown to engender a more nuanced approach to information literacy and an improvement in the acquisition of close reading skills and the understanding of historical and cultural context of the materials (Hayden: 2017, 135-36). In addition to the pedagogical benefits of engaging students in archival research early on, there has been speculation on the democratizing potential of digital archives, which generally allow for new forms of collaboration (Hayden: 2017, 137). This project aims to combine the radical and critical potential of PBL as “practice of freedom” with the enriching and challenging possibilities of digital collaborative research. By turning upside down the hierarchies of cultural and educational institutions, PBL can cut through the intimidation that students sometimes experience when entering archival spaces and activate their potential as critical cultural citizens and agents of change.

Below you may access the final project deliverables.

**Project Deliverables**

*Coming soon.*